# **Mapping Platforms**

## **[ArcGIS]{.underline}**

*ArcGIS Online enables you to connect people, locations, and data using
interactive maps. Work with smart, data-driven styles and intuitive
analysis tools that deliver location intelligence. Share your insights
with the world or specific groups.​ Build interactive maps that explain
your data and encourage users to explore. Map your own data and gain
perspective by adding the authoritative location-based data included in
ArcGIS Online. Use smart mapping to guide your data exploration and
visualization. ​*

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   Free with Tulane's subscription

-   Ability to add extra information to points on the map

-   Build on dynamic and high-quality maps

-   Lots of room for specialization, allows for animations and time
    > slider

-   Also includes graphing options

**Cons:**

-   Occasional difficulties embedding in sites

-   From reviews, arcGIS has a steep learning curve.

## **[Flourish]{.underline}**

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   Includes several compelling options for map visuals - including
    > Point Maps, which look similar to the maps produced in Palladio,
    > and Story Maps, which more closely resembles the maps produced in
    > arcGIS. Connections Globe is another cool template - visualizes
    > pathways on a 3D globe.

-   Movement can be incorporated into the maps - i.e. sliding scale
    > shows how map changes overtime

**Cons:**

-   According to one review, the public version of Flourish
    > processes/visualizes data slowly. This could potentially be a
    > hassle given the amount of data we want to visualize.

## **[Gephi]{.underline}**

**Description:**

No web version and works with Mac OS, Windows, and Linux. In order to
align data on a geographic map, you have to download the GeoLayout
plugin otherwise, the data takes on a very abstracted form that doesn\'t
really tell us much.

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   Very elegant visualization!

**Cons:**

-   From reviews, Gephi apparently has a steep learning curve and can be
    > difficult to get the hang of. There are many tutorials available
    > on the internet, but many reviewers mentioned that it was hard.

-   Although I really like the abstract data visualization style,
    > without the GeoLayout plugin. This adds one more level of software
    > that the team will have to get the hang of.

## **[Mango]{.underline}**

*Mango offers a variety of different mapping options for various
industries -- including local governments, demographics, business
analysis, and land use and planning.​ The maps are interactive, and the
platform allows you to integrate multiple workflows.​ Mango maps can be
easily embedded in your website or blog with a simple iframe embed code,
or in a popup modal.​*

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   Customizable - allows you to add additional information like video,
    > photo, and audio

-   Full brand integration

-   Data Sync - automated dataset and visualization updates from your
    > desktop GIS

**Cons:**

-   Only free for 30 days

-   Does not appear to have an integrated navigation system

## **[Mapbox]{.underline}**

*Mapbox is a platform that allows users to customize maps that fit their
needs. Come in light mode, dark mode, street mode, outdoor mode and
satellite mode.​ Satellite mode uses global satellite and aerial imagery
from commercial providers, NASA, and USGS for up-to-date and clear
imagery.​ An iframe can be used to embed a Mapbox map into a website,
insulating all the code that makes your map work from the code on your
website.​*

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   Satellite and aerial imagery, navigation

-   Built features - building footprints, rail stations, landmarks, etc

-   Available on phone, tablet, computer, and smart watches

**Cons:**

-   Might require some coding

-   Does not show where it allows you to add additional information to
    > the markers

## **[Palladio]{.underline}** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:**

Pros:

-   Fairly easy to use, tutorials are available online, reviews are
    > generally positive.

-   Includes point-to-point data visualization option

-   Data can be easily edited before converted into visualization

Cons:

-   Lacks specialization of other software like arcGIS (according to
    > testimonials on Palladio website.) Depending on the final format
    > of the map, this may be limiting.

## **[Tableau]{.underline}**

## 

## **Description:**

## 

## **Technical Complexity:**

## 

**Pros:**

-   Lots of room for specialization - includes point-to-point
    > visualization, animations, 3D options

**Cons:**

-   Steep learning curve

## **[ZeeMaps]{.underline}**

*ZeeMaps is a real-time mapping platform that allows users to add
markers to their own locations of choice along with any additional
photo, video or audio. ​Publish a map, including search, on your own
website by embedding a few lines of HTML in your web page.​*

**Technical Complexity:**

**Pros:**

-   No account needed to make maps

-   Add videos, audio, photos, etc to markers

-   Trip planner - Multi-point route optimizer for distance or time

**Cons:**

-   Might require more work on the design end
