# **Website Platform Basics**

**What is Web Hosting?**

Web hosting is a service that allows organizations and individuals to
post a website or web page onto the Internet. A web host, or web hosting
service provider, is a business that provides the technologies and
services needed for the website or webpage to be viewed in the Internet.
Websites are hosted, or stored, on special computers called servers.
When Internet users want to view your website, all they need to do is
type your website address or domain into their browser. Their computer
will then connect to your server and your webpages will be delivered to
them through the browser.

Most hosting companies require that you own your domain in order to host
with them. If you do not have a domain, the hosting companies will help
you purchase one.

**Domain Name**

A domain name is an identification string that defines a realm of
administrative autonomy, authority or control within the Internet. On
average, it cost \$10-\$15 a year to register a new domain name.

**Some features associated with web hosting:**

Email Accounts: With a domain name (e.g.
[www.yourwebsite.com](http://www.yourwebsite.com)) and
email account features provided by your hosting company, you can create
domain email accounts (e.g. yourname@yourwebsite.com).

FTP Access: The use of FTP lets you upload files from your local
computer to your web server. If you build your website using your own
HTML files, you can transfer the files from your computer to the web
server through FTP, allowing your website to be accessed through the
internet.

WordPress Support: WordPress powers over 25% of websites on the
internet. Most hosting providers will tell you right away if their plans
are WordPress-compatible or not. The simple requirements for hosting
WordPress websites include PHP version 7 or greater; MySQL version 5.6
or greater.

[https://www.website.com/beginnerguide/webhosting/6/1/what-is-web-hosting?.ws](https://www.website.com/beginnerguide/webhosting/6/1/what-is-web-hosting?.ws)

# **Website Platforms**

## **Omeka**

Omeka is a free and open-source web platform that is geared towards
creating and curating online digital collections and archives. It is
more exhibit and museum specific than other web platforms like
Wordpress, Squarespace, etc. Omeka has three versions.

### **Platform:** Omeka S

**Description:** Omeka S is for institutions managing a sharable
resource pool across a network of websites

**Technical Complexity:** A website is free to create, hosting is a paid
feature, which requires linux.

**Features:**

-   Resources can be shared across different sites

-   Import items (author, place, artwork, oral history, etc.) and put
     them into item sets

-   Vocabularies populate the properties used to describe items with
     metadata

-   A set of fields to that describe items

-   Modules (work like plugins)

-   [Good video explanation](https://omeka.org/s/tour/)

**Cost:** If wanting them to host, prices are graded by size of hosted
installation as follows:

-   100GB \$2500/yr

-   500GB \$4000/yr

-   1TB \$7000/yr

-   5TB \$12000/yr

**Pros:**

-   Designed with building exhibits in mind

-   Easily tag items with information (metadata) that helps show
     relationships between items

-   Supports rich media like photos, mapping, videos as well as
     annotations describing them

**Cons:**

-   Tulane no longer works with Omeka

-   Have to host ourselves or pay for hosting

-   Less customizability with the layout

**Resources:**

-   [Omeka in the
     classroom](https://teachinghistory.org/digital-classroom/tech-for-teachers/25115):
     a good read about the pedagogical advantages of Omeka in Digital
     Humanities education for both the builders and the visitors of the
     site

-   [Example Omeka
     archive](http://aboutdeseronto.omeka.net/): this
     archive is an example of crowd sourced public history in the same
     spirit as the MGIC

-   [Omeka Sandbox](https://omeka.org/news/2017/06/13/come-play-in-the-omeka-s-sandbox/):
    Omeka offers a "dummy" website that you can log into and see and
     play around with the user interface as if you were the owner of
     the site. You can explore the different functionalities it has or
     test to see if it will work for something you want to do

### **Platform:** Omeka Classic

**Description:** For individual projects and educators to share
collections, media, and exhibits online

**Technical Complexity:** A website is free to create, hosting is a paid
feature, which requires linux. Highly customizable, requires more
management from the user (Some sources say more difficult to use than
Omeka.net), requires maintenance of software updates and installation
(unlike Omeka.net)

**Features:**

-   Exhibit Builder

-   Customize themes

-   Dublin Core metadata

-   Tag items with keywords

-   Mapping

-   Annotations

-   Read the full list
     [here](https://omeka.org/classic/docs/GettingStarted/Feature_List/)

**Cost:** If wanting them to host, graded by size of hosted installation
as follows:

-   100GB \$2500/yr

-   500GB \$4000/yr

-   1TB \$7000/yr

-   5TB \$12000/yr

**Pros:**

-   adheres to Dublin Core standards with the ability to customize
     metadata fields

-   variety of search functionality plug-ins

-   hosts a site which the public is able to view for a fee/on user's
     own server, if applicable

-   User contribution option

-   Can organize items into exhibits to encourage a reading of items in
     a specific narrative

-   Three different themes described as particularly "image-oriented" if
     visual pictures want to be centered

-   Highly customizable, nice drop down menu functionality, variety of
     themes for different purposes with different typography, many
     themes have different "style sheet" options with color palettes
     optimized for online exhibition

-   Cool word cloud functionality to show the popularity of certain
     tags, as shown [here](https://newdeal.oucreate.com/)
     (near bottom of page)

-   mapping potential to link items to an interactive map of a certain
     area

-   can add a scroll through of items in exhibit on bottom.

**Cons:**

**Resources:**

### **Platform:** Omeka.net

**Description:** Omeka.net is a hosted service option for publishing
digital collections and exhibits, allowing users to run Omeka Classic
without worrying about installation or hosting.

**Technical Complexity:** Hosted by Omeka; reviews say significantly
easier to use than Omeka Classic, sacrifices some customization for
functionality

**Features:**

-   Exhibit Builder

-   Customize themes

-   Dublin Core metadata

-   Tag items with keywords

-   Mapping

-   Annotations

-   Read the full list
     [here](https://omeka.org/classic/docs/GettingStarted/Feature_List/)

**Cost:**

-   Plus - 35 a year

-   Silver - 75 a year

-   Gold - 350 a year

-   Platinum - 1000 a year

**Pros:**

-   Public archiving capabilities are same as Omeka Classic, "adheres to
     Dublin Core standards with the ability to customize metadata
    fields, variety of search functionality plug-ins, hosts a site
     which the public is able to view for a fee/on user's own server,
     if applicable.

-   User contribution option.

-   Ability to visualize online exhibits are same as Omeka Classic with
     the exception that the Silver plan does not allow access to the
     three image-oriented themes

-   Eight theme options on Silver plan, eleven (including the three
     image-oriented themes) on Gold, some themes have style sheet
     options for different color options.

-   Dynamic and engaging visualizations are same as Omeka Classic, map
     functionality seems to be most exciting visualization

**Cons:**

**Resources:**

## **Wordpress**

Wordpress is a web platform created for blogs and websites. It has many
different variations that can adapt to different situations. It is often
augmented with plugins and themes in order to customize the
functionality of the site based on the stie's goals.

**Technical Complexity:**

**Features:**

**Cost:**

-   Personal, \$4/month, 6 GB

    -   custom domain

    -   unlimited access to email support

-   Premium, \$8/month, 13 GB

    -   Advanced design tools, Custom CSS (would require knowledge of
         web coding to take advantage of this), Google Analytics
         support (good to help boost the website on google searches)

-   Business, \$25/month, 200 GB, Custom plugins & themes,

    -   24/7 live chat

**Pros:**

-   Don't have to worry about hosting

-   Lots of storage

-   Easy to use and students might have experience with it

-   Tulane has a lot of resources

-   Very easy to display text based content

-   Has a blog feature

**Cons:**

-   Not necessarily built for curation/archives

-   Can be supplemented with plugins, but some cost extra and could be
     buggy

-   Limited customizability, specifically in adding outside media

**Resources:**

-   [Library Guides: How to Create an Online Exhibit: Tulane Online
     Exhibits](https://libguides.tulane.edu/online_exhibit/platform):
     resources, questions, and ideas curated by Tulane's Howard Tilton
     Memorial Library that includes a Wordpress specific tutorial and
     general exhibit structure advice

-   [Combining Omeka and
     Wordpress](https://swhplibrary.net/archive/digital-archive-software/):
     combining the two platforms allows for taking advantage of the
     design features of Wordpress and the archiving power of Omeka

-   [A Tutorial for Online Exhibitions at the British
     Museum](https://wp.wpi.edu/london/projects/2019-projects-spring/british-museum/):
     One of many detailed outlines of the process of creating online
     exhibits through Wordpress

-   [Culture Object: an open source WordPress plugin for getting museum
     objects online](https://cultureobject.co.uk/): this
     is a good example of a plugin that will elevate Wordpress to have
     more archive friendly features

## **collectiveaccess.org** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** have demo here
[https://demo.collectiveaccess.org/index.php/system/auth/login?redirect=https%3A%2F%2Fdemo.collectiveaccess.org%2Findex.php%2FDashboard%2FIndex](https://demo.collectiveaccess.org/index.php/system/auth/login?redirect=https%3A%2F%2Fdemo.collectiveaccess.org%2Findex.php%2FDashboard%2FIndex),
clicking around pretty easy to use the cataloging functionality, not as
clear where the website design portion is but they claim to host that
using themes as well, a review from the Canadian government's
collections management department says "user friendly for doing the data
entry, but the implementation, maintenance, migration, or upgrading must
be done by a savvy person who will need to do a lot of reading on the
software website and wiki, but support from the company is available
with fees."

**Features:**

-   Public archiving capabilities: can upload objects, have opportunity
     to tag with an "entity" and organize objects by that entity, can
     organize objects into exhibits or collections, can input storage
     location information, can attach objects to specific events or
     occurrences, design public website through their software, search
     seems standardized rather than super customizable

-   Ability to visualize online exhibits: can see pictures in a large
     view format, not much other visualization possibilities

-   Static content aesthetics: information mentions themes for the
     website publishing aspect, the sample projects seem to use similar
     typefaces but their own color palette, typeface used b**y all** is
     nice and readable while staying engaged

-   Dynamic and engaging visualizations: Strong linked organization
    possibilities for the information, does not visualize this
     organization in the most interesting manner

**Cost:** free but you will need to host it yourself

**Pros:**

**Cons:**

**Resources:**

## **scalar.usc.edu** 

*Scalar is a platform for creating long-form, interactive archives and
exhibits. It is specifically created for born-digital curations using
different types of media to create a narrative*

**Technical Complexity:** claims itself to be easy to use, combines
"standardization and structural flexibility" to be useful for a variety
of sources, which implies a level of ease. PC mag calls it easy to use
as well

**Features:**

-   Particularly noticeable for its flexible structure with regards to
     grouping and sequencing, can make visually appealing archives, can
     travel through exhibits in a planned order. Blog style commenting
     option to further engage the public

-   As mentioned below, particularly notable for unique visualization
     options, can make pictures larger or smaller, can see in a
     scrolling box or individually, easy to cite pictures and get their
     details straight from the website

-   Static content aesthetics: options for easy page layout changes on a
     surface level, have the ability to go into code via CSS to more
     thoroughly edit the style of the presentation

-   Dynamic and engaging visualizations: Have stated goal of emphasizing
     21st century scholarly communication's possibilities, I think
     visualizations really show that. Ton of engaging options for
     making connections between information more visual. Mapping
     feature like Omeka but also option to make an information tree, to
     make a web of the information, and the more complicated gridding
     feature. Furthermore, there is timeline functionality and an
     option to organize information into headings and subheadings for a
     more linear narrative.

**Cost:** free

**Pros:**

-   Supports media as well as other graphics like interactive timelines
     and maps

-   Made for exhibits/digital archives and DH projects

-   Strong community support and user guides, including free workshops

-   Can use external tools like
     [KnightsLab](https://pitt.libguides.com/digital-tools-primary-resource/knight-lab-tools)

**Cons:**

-   Does not navigate like a traditional website with a menu, so might
     be easy to get lost or just browse

-   Could run into storage/hosting problems (could be solved with
     integration with the existing MGIC site)

-   Not as big and well established as Wordpress/Omeka

**Resources:**

-   [Example
     Exhibit](https://scalar.usc.edu/works/unpinning-history-japanese-posters-in-the-age-of-commercialism-imperialism-and-modernism/index):
     good example of an exhibit that is more "browse-friendly" that
     would function more like a traditional museum

-   [Example Digital
     Archive](https://scalar.usc.edu/works/chicanadiasporic/index):
     shows the many features that helps create robust archives
     accompanied by annotated narratives that are interconnected to
     allow users to do a deep dive into the material

-   [Example Class
     Project](https://scalar.usc.edu/works/the-voyages-of-the-clarence/introduction?path=index):
     provides an example of scalar as a collaborative project with
     multiple authors

## **Github**

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** Requires some knowledge of HTML and some CSS,
can also use Javascript

**Features:**

-   resources here
     [https://github.com/mlibrary/online-exhibits](https://github.com/mlibrary/online-exhibits)
     (this one is just Omeka but probably a lot more flexible), here
     [https://github.com/sul-dlss/exhibits](https://github.com/sul-dlss/exhibits)
     (based on the Stanford Library online exhibit code), here
     [https://github.com/jagrajSidhu/eExhibition.com](https://github.com/jagrajSidhu/eExhibition.com)
     for public archiving

-   Unsure about the jagrajSidhu one but the Stanford option provides
     [examples](https://exhibits.stanford.edu/) of
     existing exhibits that are visually forward

-   unsure how Stanford's code would translate to another host's website
     but think that github means theming is very flexible

-   Can imbed pictures in text on the Stanford one and make them bigger,
     github has a lot of code options if you search individually for
     what you want (word clouds, lots of data visualization tools)

**Cost:** free\
\
**Pros:\
\
Cons:\
\
Resources:**

## **exhibits.tulane.edu (Wordpress)** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** Wordpress software is easy to use, might have
limited capabilities

**Features:**

-   Websites already on Tulane exhibits page display somewhat content to
     the public, for public archiving

-   Can organize into subsections, can make pictures large and a
     significant portion of the page if desired for visualizing online
     exhibits

-   Option for KnightLab Storytelling tools, including frame
     comparisons, VR stories, inline audio, timeline, maps, and
     storyline, all of which look nice in the other existing exhibits

**Cost:** free

**Pros:**

**Cons:**

**Resources:**

## **Collection Builder**

*Collection Builder works by uploading a CSV (a file similar to an excel
spreadsheet) with images, documents, and other media and metadata
describing them to a site that can be hosted for free on GitHub, a
popular code repository and sharing site.*

**Technical Complexity:**

**Features:**

**Cost:**

**Pros:**

-   Designed for learning and to be approachable for beginners

-   Good introduction to minimal computing

-   Extensive documentation, tutorials, and videos

-   interactive maps using leaflet

-   auto-generated timelines

-   search- and subject-based browsing

-   tag clouds for subjects, locations, or custom fields

**Cons:**

-   Requires use of GitHub, which can be overwhelming/big learning curve

-   Not customizable design-wise

-   Not as big and well established as Wordpress/Omeka

**Resources:**

-   [Collection Builder
     example](https://collectionbuilder.github.io/collectionbuilder-gh/):
     this is the demo site that explains and showcases the many
     features of collection builder

-   [GitHub
     Repository](https://github.com/CollectionBuilder/collectionbuilder-gh):
     provides a peek into a mini-comp code repository (it looks scary
     but nearly all the code is written for you - all you have to do is
     follow the instructions to upload your dataset)

-   [How I think about Omeka, CollectionBuilder, and
     Wax](https://gist.github.com/mnyrop/cd7e4e9338913ffcf8e1a47e012b5732):
    good advice comparing different minimal computing (minicomp)
     platforms from an expert

-   What metadata do we want to include?

    -   Do we want article descriptions/annotations?

    -   How to deal with titles and subtitles (can get wordy)?

    -   Should articles be organized into tags or categories?

    -   Do we follow [Dublin
         Core](https://www.dublincore.org/specifications/dublin-core/dcmi-terms/)
         (a defined practice for documenting metadata) standards, or is
         there a better standard we want to use or create?

## **Readymag** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** No technical skills required as designing was
made to be in browser, but the plan starting at \$384 a year allows for
code injection

**Features:**

**Cost:** Free with limited options and paid versions ranging from
\$16/month to \$64 a month

**Pros:**

-   Beautiful interface

-   very design focused

-   allows unlimited draft projects

-   Web hosting is built into each Readymag plan and is provided by
     Amazon Cloud,

-   Mobile capabilities are supported

**Cons:**

-   have to pay to get more features

-   only paid version allows photo galleries

-   google analytics, etc

-   only 1 project can be published at a time with free version

-   10 pages per project (free version)

-   1 collaborator at a time, has readymag branding (free version)

**Resources:**

## **Crevado** 
*Functions mostly as a portfolio site, but it is perfect for showcasing
images and has the option of adding text.*

**Technical Complexity:** Uses HTML to work across desktops, laptops,
tablets and smartphones, though it does not require any technical
knowledge, but CSS can be edited in premium version

**Features:**

**Cost:** Free, with plus option at \$6/month, premium at \$9/month

**Pros:**

-   Allows Google Analytics

-   Secure HTTPS Hosting

-   Mobile-optimized

**Cons:**

-   Most of the design work would be on our end

-   Most likely will have to design all logos to make the site look nice

-   only premium offers the option to own your domain

-   free only allows 30 images

-   no audio for free

-   no video for free or plus

**Resources:**
[https://avibarzel.crevado.com/](https://avibarzel.crevado.com/)

## **ucraft** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** No coding necessary to build website, many
templates ready to be used

**Features:**

**Cost:** Free - limited options, with Pro options starting at
\$10/month

**Pros:**

-   Unlimited bandwidth

-   free hosting -- fast and secure websites hosted on Google Cloud

-   allows for other integrations such as Google Analytics, Hotjar,
    Hello Bar, etc.,

-   can connect custom domain in free version

-   can design logos for you

**Cons:**

-   free version doesn't include designer and blogging tools

-   limited to 15 pages for free version

-   cannot add embed HTML/CSS/JS until paid options

**Resources:**

-   [https://www.tesmodels.com/about](https://www.tesmodels.com/about)

-   [https://hedgefoxstudio.ucraft.site/](https://hedgefoxstudio.ucraft.site/)

## **Wix.com**

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:**

**Features:**

**Cost:** Pricing starts at \$14/month

**Pros:**

-   Unlimited pages and top-grade hosting for free

-   premium options available

-   Mobile optimized

**Cons:**

-   Cannot own domain with free option

**Resources:**

-   [https://www.heroinesinc.org/](https://www.heroinesinc.org/)

-   [https://www.zelieforshe.com/thestory](https://www.zelieforshe.com/thestory)

## **Weebly** 

**Description:**

**Technical Complexity:** No coding necessary, website can be built
through drag and drop, but custom HTML/CSS/JS can be implemented

**Features:**

**Cost:** Free - limited options, paid options starting at \$6/month
(billed annually)

**Pros:**

-   Free version allows 3rd party embedded code

-   themes created by top designers

-   image editor

-   video and audio can be added

-   supports all types of website styles

**Cons:**

-   Cannot connect to a custom domain for free

-   free storage is not available until the second paid option
     (\$12/month, billed annually)

**Resources:**

# **Possible Routes for Archive**

**CSV upload to Wordpress**

-   Process detailed
     [here](https://tulane.box.com/s/eytwx8eoo87p1eel3etyfka6x92omk0a).
    A CSV sheet operates similarly to a standard excel spreadsheet. To
     prepare the data for upload, we would need to make an organized
     excel sheet with each column holding information (metadata) about
     each object (photo, newspaper article, etc.) which is displayed as
     a row. Example columns would be title, author, date, keywords, or
     what other metadata is helpful to display with that object. A
     wordpress plugin that would be installed on the site would allow
     the user to upload the CSV, specify a format for each row (i.e.
     each object) to be displayed with all of its accompanying
     metadata. The plugin will create a post for each row in the
     spreadsheet that displays each object with its accompanying data
     in the format specified by the user. The posts can then be
     organized and displayed in a number of ways through Wordpress.

-   I worked on a [similar
     project](https://thisbeautifulsisterhood.wpcomstaging.com/)
     that used Wordpress for an archive (the site is still in progress,
     but it gives an idea of how it would look)

**Tulane Wordpress Exhibit**

-   Tulane has resources for building
     [exhibits](https://exhibits.tulane.edu/)

-   I don't know if there is a way to not have it explicitly linked to
     Tulane and am not sure of the sustainability of this option

-   Regardless, they have good exhibit building
     [resources](https://libguides.tulane.edu/online_exhibit/home)

**Wordpress Exhibit Plugin**

-   [Culture Object](https://cultureobject.co.uk/) is made
     for importing museum objects

-   [Tainacan](https://wordpress.org/plugins/tainacan/)
     helps create a digital repository

**Combining Wordpress and Omeka**

-   As described
     [here](https://swhplibrary.net/archive/digital-archive-software/),
     Omeka could be used for the archive and Wordpress for
     text/informational pages. This would let us combine the strengths
     of each platform to create organized informational pages with a
     navigable archive. The downside is that whoever is running the
     sites in the future (the Council, a web manager, intern, students,
     etc.) would have to be proficient in both Wordpress and Omeka.

**Archive Inspiration**

*These websites were curated by LifexCode as possible sites to inspire
our archives and exhibits*

-   [https://www.honeypotperformance.org/](https://www.honeypotperformance.org/):
     This is a good example of using Wordpress for content and Omeka
     for archives. The [Chicago Black Social Culture map
     archive](https://cbscmap.omeka.net/) is created using
     Omeka and is linked to from the Wordpress website. This could be a
     viable plan for linking the existing MGIC website to an
     archive-focused space

# **Glossary**

*Explaining technical terms and concepts*

-   **Frontend**: the public facing side of the website; the part of the
     website that the average viewer interacts with

-   **Backend**: the behind-the-scenes side of the website seen by
     administrators; the place where administrators can create and edit
     content, media, and settings

-   **Content Management System (CMS): the CMS used is the custom
     Wordpress site from the Peter Mayer firm. The CMS allows you to
     store, display, and manipulate like pages and media**

-   **Metadata**: a set of data that describes other data. For example,
     the "other data" being described could be a photo and the metadata
     could be the photographer, the date is was taken, the title of the
     photo, etc

-   **PHP**: PHP is a web-scripting language that works on things
     interacting with the server. It is more specialized and less
     common than CSS, so it is likely that a professional would be
     needed to make any edits that require changing the PHP.

-   **CSS**: a web-based coding language that controls the style of a
     page. It is not necessary to be proficient in CSS to build a
    website, but there are many web resources that are helpful in
     making tweaks to the CSS to make minor layout changes.
